---
layout: post 
title:  "Web apps as a replacement for desktop apps"
---
I've been using Ubuntu for a long time, and there were good days and 
there were of course bad days. However in most of the cases Canonical 
had a lot of great ideas.

Today I would like to focus 
on one awesome idea, at least it looked awesome on the paper. It's web 
applications. It's been several years since I started using those and 
I've had enough data to establish opinion on what would fit my needs.<!--more--> 
Idea is pretty simple you should be able to interact with web 
application in a similar manner to what is available for real desktop 
apps and then OS would guarantee seamless experience for web app. I was 
so happy to see that idea coming alive with 14.04. My expectation 
especially around Google services was that you should be able simply 
create an Online Account and system will keep me logged in for as long 
as I want.

Enough with expectations, let's try it, I 
was thinking to myself. First try disappointed me a lot, Online Accounts
 was not working seamlessly, web applications required login every time I
 run it, for some reasons it won't store cookies properly. Browser part 
itself is quite weird, for example Gmail detects it as some sort of 
Safari and downgrades experience. It conflicts with Firefox, and if it 
is Firefox(as I am guessing) it runs in sort of safe mode without any 
extensions, and extensions is what making Firefox a good browser. Fast 
forward quite some time and now cookie problem is fixed, at least I 
don't have to enter credentials every time, however it still some how 
conflicts with Firefox. It feels ok for the most of the parts and 
simpler app/website is more chance for success such app would have. But 
there is lack of user experience, for example Amazon app which comes 
with Ubuntu lacks one simple thing, it's "back" button. I know it's not Ubuntu, but since it's installed by default most of the people going to think it's part of OS. 

I have started looking around for alternatives and surely decided to go 
with Chrome. Chrome's concept is very close to what I was looking for, 
your could run an app in a separate windows and if you are using 
particular extensions everything is available for you, so AdBlockPlus 
saves from ads and LastPass remembers all the passwords. On top of all 
of that Chrome supports native desktop notifications, even in Linux, and
 looking at what is coming out from that camp with every stable release I
 feel good about decision I made. It helps that Chrome runs each tab in a
 sandbox and crash of one tab/app won't crash rest of the browser. Down 
side of that of course memory usage is quite high. Also app makers for 
most parts care about users using their apps as apps, and in most of the
 cases those leave pleasant experience. As a result Chrome's App 
Launcher found it's constant place in my Unity Launcher.


