---
layout: post 
title:  "Bitcoin - consumer's perspective."
---
Working on the front line of IonTec Software LLC is a lot of fun. 
Some time ago I was helping one of our customers to navigate through 
industry buzzwords and see if they could improve their business 
processes by implementing some of the new technologies. One of the 
technologies in question was a block chain. They were wondering if and 
how they could implement it to improve their business. All of those 
conversations reminded me of the Bitcoin and inspired me to write this 
post, where I'd like to take a look at the Bitcoin(BTC) from consumer's 
perspective.<br />
Let me set some boundaries: I am not going to talk 
about investing in BTC, because I am not a professional investor and it 
looks to me like a giant speculation. So you potentially may score a 
something on short-term deals, if you have a sizable amount of assets to
 risk with, because, most likely, price will go up as it becomes more 
and more popular and it will. However at the end of the day, BTC is just
 a cryptocurrency, so I put it very simple, why would you invest into a 
currency, even if it is the currency of the future. Also, I am not going
 to talk about mining, as it's being talked everywhere and it's not 
really practical or profitable especially here in the US, as it requires
 expensive hardware to start with and uses a lot of electricity, which 
quite expensive. However, it might be reasonable for some countries 
where electricity is essentially free.<br />
What I'd like to talk about
 today is to take a look at BTC from consumers side of the world. The 
premise of the Bitcoin is quite simple and compelling, it would allow 
almost instantaneous transactions between parties with a low fee, like 
peer-to-peer transactions. Think about transferring money abroad for one
 reason or another, it may cost a fortune to wire money and you'll have 
to wait at least 3 days for the transfer to appear on the other's party 
account. Replacing all of this with BTC transaction sounds way too nice,
 right?<br />
Let's take a look at transactions part deeper. Today we 
have about 7.5 billion people on our planet. So what if those people 
will start to transact on BTC network, what if even half of those will? 
Surely it will create a lot of transactions. A quick search on a number 
of transaction that VISA network is handling per second will give you a 
magic number of 4K transactions. So how much is BTC capable of? Well ...
 apparently, there is a limit of 7 transactions per second, just 7! As 
it's not yet ready to conquer the world, let's look at the more local 
approach. Let's try to estimate what's the volume of transactions here 
in the US. Another quick search and we will arrive at magic number 35 
which is the average number of orders per second for Amazon, but there 
are other retailers with a similar volume. Which means that BTC is not 
capable to become our daily driver here, at least not for now. I have to
 mention that Bitcoin's wiki has an article about some proposal which 
will supposedly bring network to at least level of VISA with their 4K 
transactions per second and I hope they will find the way to improve 
that area, but until that happens, waiting for 10-20 min at my local 
coffee shop while paying with BTC is not going to happen.<br />
Enough 
about transactions, let's move to another aspect, its openness. All 
transactions recorded and tracked by everybody on the network. People 
would argue that it anonymous and because it's anonymous it's fine that 
everyone sees transactions. Well, in reality, it's pseudo anonymous or 
it's anonymous until there is no association between the person and a 
signature which is visible for the entire network. Now let's think 
ahead, the network is public, so everybody can see all transactions, 
right? Imagine what a privacy nightmare it's going to create if, say, 
pizza shop, where you used your hard-earned bitcoins and provided 
delivery address plus your name, got compromised. Given, that national 
chains can't deliver good products and people would rather order pizza 
from a local shop, which may not have money of a large corporation to 
improve their cyber security, it's totally possible. Then just imagine 
options for targeted advertisement, if one of the advertisers can 
associate the name to a signature, and profile person's spending, learn 
about habits, like pizza delivery on Friday night. With today's 
advancements and growth in artificial intelligence that type of data is 
very dangerous. I am not even talking about bad guys and how they can 
use that type of information. While paying on the network you have to 
think twice on what information traces you leave, because once someone 
can associate the name to a signature a lot of things possible.<br />
Based
 on those 2 items I think that Bitcoin is not yet consumer ready, 
however, a potential is there and especially as a lot of innovation 
going on in that sphere and one day one of those cryptocurrencies would 
be able to take on consumer space and get rid of payment processing 
networks, a.k.a the middle man.
