---
layout: post 
title:  "Algorithms hijacking our attention"
---

Today we live in a surveillance capitalism, big tech companies cashing big without people realizing it.
It's all started with a symbiosis of advertisement industry and internet. Rise of internet connected people, but it also gave birth to a new business model. Under this model people are getting free service and corporation providing such service are trying to figure out how they can pay for computing resources and R&D required for those platforms. Those services are covering all corners of internet like search, email, then social media platforms, instant messaging and video streaming services. At the beginning everyone was getting a simply banners from a highest bidders with quite irrelevant content. That was not perfect for advertisers on those platform themselves, so best minds got working and introduced new term targeted advertisement. With that new flourishing era of the "free" services has began.
Targeted advertisement on a very simple basis does analysis of the information available about user like for instance search terms and then serves advertisement based on that. That was not enough it proceeded with texts of your emails and instant messaging, text of your posts, your likes and so on. Services were essentially free, based on claims laid out in privacy terms information is anonymized and sold to advertisers. People didn't see a problem in giving up their own privacy to those services in exchange of access, data is being anonymized anyway, right? Right? In reality it was bit more sophisticated every user is represented with a model and then model is being sold to an advertisers. So in reality it's not just content and actions you take on a particular platform it is actually interconnected across entire internet and this model are trying to predict your next move. With those little devices that we carry in our pocket every where models has become richer in data and better. Have you ever caught yourself in a situation when you just had a conversation with your friends and then boom you getting advertisement for something you mentioned in that conversation and you are fairly certain that you never searched anything or expressed any of your intentions in a virtual world, and you often blamed that your device is listening, reality is bit more starker, most likely your model has become really good that it can predict your next move and sell it to advertisers. However it all didn't stop there is is just a beginning of new era. in that industry.
Today those platforms no longer sell just your models, they still do as in many cases as level of complexity is different on every platform, however for most business model is very simple they sell your attention. Have you ever heard a term "engagement" that's a fancy synonym for attention, and that's what everyone is after. Every app, social network and helpful web-app out there(either free or paid) designed with a single principle to hook you up and keep grab on your attention as much as they possible can. All of that is being packaged and sold to advertisers, so in addition to a pretty good and relevant model that they already have more they keep you on that app more targeted advertisement you'll get served. Behind every feature in those apps or devices there is an army of engineers who's performance is tied to user engagement on a platform. Holy grail for them is figuring out what makes your model tick, what drives you and keep on serving "interesting" content to keep you hooked, and they will use every dirty trick on you to get there. Now if you think how many apps you have installed on your phone and imagine them fighting 24/7 for your attention, and out of those 24 hours 8 hours we were suppose to be asleep.
That has become a gigantic problem for a society as a whole, "social" media apps that made a promise to connect the world keep out children hooked up to the point even when they are together they still have their phones out and "talk" using those devices. Unfortunately people have a significant flaw content that keep us hooked not necessarily content that is good for us, it's often the opposite. Ultimately algorithms that serving you carefully selected content driving your thoughts and on a large scale they destroying fabric of our society because instead of taking actions that will solve our problems at hand you stuck on your phone often exercising "minutes of hate".
So what is the solution, often those companies blame users onto themselves pointing out obvious solutions that are available for users and stating that they gave options to users, but it is also true that those solutions often clunky and hard to setup comparing to how easy to use any of the apps. There are also people who say that only regulatory regime will change those companies. I think answer is bit more nuanced, I think it's multi step approach. First step is for users to become aware of what the rules of the game are, and then decide what they can do. Remember you only have 1 life and more time you spend with your phone less time you left to spend on your actual life. Screen of a computer is not your life. Step 2 is to take actions and once you understand rules, doing simple steps like putting your phone away during evening hours, turning it into do not disturb mode for a night, managing it during your working hours, for disabling social media sites to keep you focused on work. Remainder is bit more complicated, I tend to believe that fighting against lobbying Goliath of those platforms to bring regulatory changes is going to be hard, thus best way I see we can approach this is to deprive those giants of a data points. Being counchaces of what you share and where is a part of the game, but if you still stay on a platform they continue to have access to your data and continue to improve profiles, as entire business model and incentives are around feeding off of your data. So that's where I see(shameless plug) [Ethiork](https://www.ethiorl.com) can bring power back to people. Main purpose of Ethiork is to bring your data into your house, as for many of the services that are available on those platforms you can find open source alternatives and Ethiork project is set to make it easy for consumers to deploy themselves. You need an email server, here you go, you need instant messaging service here is one, social network - we've got you covered. Everything is served from your home and you completely own your data, all you need is a decent internet connection. This is just essentially using market forces against those corporations, in addition to being counchaise of what you share.

